feat(themes): theme doc updates (#15327)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/tutorial/using-a-theme.md

---
title: Using a Theme
---

> In this tutorial, we'll familiarize with using Gatsby themes by creating a new site using the official Gatsby blog theme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you'll learn how to use Gatsby themes by creating a new site using the official Gatsby blog theme.
```

## Create a new site using the blog theme starter

Creating a site using a theme starter starts the same way as using a regular Gatsby starter:

```shell
gatsby new my-blog https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-blog-theme
```

## Run the site

> Creating a new site from the starter installed all of the blog theme's dependencies for you. Let's run the site and see what we have:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating a new site from the starter installed all of the blog theme's dependencies for you. Next, run the site and see what you have:
```

```shell
cd my-blog
gatsby develop
```

![Default screen when starting a project using gatsby blog starter](./images/starter-blog-theme-default.png)

## Replace your avatar

The blog theme starter ships with a solid gray image for the avatar. Add your own avatar by choosing the image you want, and overwriting the file located at `/content/assets/avatar.png`.

## Update your site metadata

Customize the information on your site by replacing the site metadata in the `gatsby-config.js` file.

```javascript:title=gatsby-config.js
module.exports = {
  plugins: [
    {
      resolve: `gatsby-theme-blog`,
      options: {},
    },
  ],
  // Customize your site metadata:
  {/* highlight-start */}
  siteMetadata: {
    title: `My Blog`,
    author: `Amberley Romo`,
    description: `A collection of my thoughts and writings.`,
    siteUrl: `https://amberley.blog/`,
    social: [
      {
        name: `twitter`,
        url: `https://twitter.com/amber1ey`,
      },
      {
        name: `github`,
        url: `https://github.com/amberleyromo`,
      },
    ],
  },
  {/* highlight-end */}
}
```

## Replace the content of the bio

> When using Gatsby themes, we can take advantage of something called component shadowing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using Gatsby themes, you can take advantage of something called component shadowing.
```

> The gatsby blog theme package has a component that contains the content of the site author's biography. The file path to that component (in the blog theme package, not your site) is `gatsby-theme-blog/src/components/bio-content.js`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Gatsby blog theme package has a component that contains the content of the site author's biography. The file path to that component (in the blog theme package, not your site) is `gatsby-theme-blog/src/components/bio-content.js`.
```

If you look at the file tree of your site, you'll see it looks like this:

```
my-blog
├── content
│   ├── assets
│   │   └── avatar.png
│   └── posts
│       ├── hello-world.mdx
│       └── my-second-post.mdx
├── src
│   └── gatsby-theme-blog
│       ├── components
│       │   └── bio-content.js
│       └── gatsby-theme-ui
│           └── colors.js
├── gatsby-config.js
└── package.json
```

In the `src` directory of the site, there's a `gatsby-theme-blog` directory. Any file placed in that directory that corresponds to a file in the blog theme will completely shadow the theme.

> 💡 The name of the directory (here `gatsby-theme-blog`) must exactly mirror the name of the name of the published theme package, which in this case is [`gatsby-theme-blog`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/gatsby-theme-blog).

> Let's open up the `bio-content.js` file and make some content edits:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open up the `bio-content.js` file and make some content edits:
```

```jsx:title=bio-content.js
export default () => (
  {/* highlight-start */}
  <Fragment>
    This is my updated bio.
    <br />
    It's shadowing the content from the theme.
  </Fragment>
  {/* highlight-end */}
)
```

> At this point, we have an updated avatar, updated site details, and an updated bio:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, you should have an updated avatar, updated site details, and an updated bio:
```

![Screenshot of project with current tutorial edits](./images/starter-blog-theme-edited.png)

## Add your own blog content

> Now let's add our first blog post, and get rid of the demo content in the starter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can add your first blog post, and get rid of the demo content in the starter.
```

### Create a new blog post

Create a new file in `my-blog/content/posts`. Name it whatever you'd like (with a `.md` or `.mdx` file extension), and add some content! Here's an example:

```mdx:title=my-blog/content/posts/my-first-post.mdx
---
title: My first post
date: 2019-07-03
---

This will be my very first post on this blog!
```

### Delete the demo posts

Delete the two demo posts in the `/content/posts` directory:

- `my-blog/content/posts/hello-world.mdx`
- `my-blog/content/posts/my-second-post.mdx`

Restart the dev server, and you'll see your updated blog content:

![Screenshot of project with updated post content](./images/starter-blog-theme-updated-content.png)

## Change the color theme

> The blog theme ships with a default Gatsby purple theme, but you can override and customize the theming of your site to your heart's content. In this tutorial, we'll change a few colors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The blog theme ships with a default Gatsby purple theme, but you can override and customize the theming of your site to your heart's content. In this tutorial, you'll change a few colors.
```

Open up `/src/gatsby-theme-blog/gatsby-theme-ui/colors.js`, and uncomment the code in that file.

```javascript:title=colors.js
{/* highlight-start */}
const blue60 = "#007acc"
const blue30 = "#66E0FF"
const blueGray = "#282c35"
{/* highlight-end */}

export default merge({}, defaultThemeColors, {
  {/* highlight-start */}
    text: blueGray,
    primary: blue60,
    heading: blueGray,
    modes: {
      dark: {
        background: blueGray,
        primary: blue30,
        highlight: blue60,
      },
    },
   {/* highlight-end */}
})
```

> Now, instead of a purple theme, we have a blue theme instead:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, instead of a purple theme, you have a blue theme instead:
```

![Screenshot of project with updated color theme](./images/starter-blog-theme-updated-colors.png)

> In this file, we're pulling in the default color theme (imported as `defaultThemeColors` here), and overriding certain color keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this file, you're pulling in the default color theme (imported as `defaultThemeColors` here), and overriding certain color keys.
```

To see what other theme colors you can customize, check out the `colors.js` file in the official blog theme (`gatsby-theme-blog/src/gatsby-theme-ui/colors.js`)

## Wrapping up

> This was a step-by-step introduction to using a Gatsby theme through looking at a specific example. Note that different themes will be built differently, to accept different customization options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was a step-by-step introduction to using a Gatsby theme through looking at a specific example. Note that different themes will be built differently, to accept different customization options. To dive deeper, check out the Gatsby [Theme docs](/docs/themes/).
```
